- Feben Alemu
- Geog 458A
- 03/12/2021
- Final Essay


                                      
# Killings by Oakland Police Department
                                       
   Police brutality may be caused by officers’ actions where they apply excessive force, verbal or/and physical harassment against a person. One of the origins of Police brutality comes from discrimination. The United States has had a long history of racism towards civilians based on their skin color. Though there is so much discrimination against one’s color, one of the things faced by people of color and minorities is police brutality. I am very passionate about human rights, justice, and equality for minorities, especially people of color. Therefore, I decided to base my final essay project on The Anti-Eviction Mapping Project, a group of digital cartographers who record gentrification struggles and create resistance tools. This project aims to explicitly show killings of people by the Oakland Police Department (OPD) from 1968 until 2020. 
   
   The map tiles were made by Stamen Design, and the data was by OpenStreetMap. The project’s central part is the interactive map that should include location pins that describe an incident with more detailed information. The legend is categorized colors for each race and neighborhood by murder. Outside of the map, a histogram chart shows the dates of police killings from 1968 up until 2020, which indicates the number of people killed within those years individually and collectively. This project will help anyone who is researching police brutality, black lives, human rights, and discrimination within the police department. This project can further understand the history of police killings and what can be done to improve it in the future. Some of the data sources include articles from newspapers and news websites that have reported these incidents regarding police officers’ killings.  
   
   The term interactive implies that the viewer can somehow interact with the map. This can mean selecting different map data layers to view or zooming into a particular part of the map that you are interested in. All this is done while interacting with the web page and a map image that is repeatedly updated. The flow would work like this; a user requests a map from the web server, and the server passes the request to the web mapping server, who then pulls together all the data. The map is given all the way back to the end user’s web browser. Since the web pages render well on a range of devices and window or screen sizes, this project promotes responsive web design. The site uses fluid, proportion-based grids, versatile images, and media queries to adapt the layout to the viewing context. Some of the interactive features include; when a pin is selected, it lists the name, race, age, and location of the person that was killed by the OPD, along with a story of what happened and where the information was retrieved. The basemap when zoomed out looks like Stamen Toner (Retina), where the land is white and the rest like body water is black. One of the pros of this project is that the map is easy to read and understand. It allows the user to interact with the map and understand the story behind it; in terms of geo-narrative. Each interactive preview section has a source where the link to where the information originated from was added. I did not really find any cons with this project, one suggestion I have is for the owner to add a paragraph or section for an introduction about the map or the overview of what the map is supposed to tell the audience about. I was a little confused at first until I took my time to play around with the interactive part, which was when I was able to clearly see the main point of the project. The aim of this project is to display all of the people killed by the Oakland Police Department from 1968 to 2020. The most important aspect of the interactive map includes locations that give a preview pop-up per dot on the map that explains the incident with more detailed facts. for example the person's name, age, race, and the story of what happened are all mentioned. 
   
   In week 7’s readings, we learned about geo-narrative and the use of storytelling in mapping practice as well as looking at existing geo-narrative mapping. I remember reading one of the articles assigned and it talks about how, geovisualisation is beyond just video games, “it is possible also to be affected by the power of those images to highlight social injustice, geographies of AIDS, or the tragedies of the global sex trade. Affective geovisualisations are soulful; they tug at our hearts to the extent that we may be mobilized to action” (Aitken and Craine, pg. 279). Being able to use digital images in spaces to bring awareness to issues like social justice is very powerful. story behind the maps. The interactivity of maps is important because the geo-narrative approach allows users to learn the story behind the maps. Also during week 8, i read an article about LAPD where police surveillance is used to cause harm more than good especially in communities that are disproportionately minority, in these neighborhoods surveillance is a process of social control. Person-based predictive policing claimed that for individuals who are called “persons of interest” or “habitual offenders” who may have had some history in the past, using a risk assessment tool to establish that they were going to recidivate. So it was a numbers game. If they had any gun possession in the past, they were assigned five points. If they were on parole or probation, they were assigned five points. These AI systems like Predpol and Operation Laser have predictive policing based on a hot spot or person based predictive policing which is used as a way to look for the continuation of history and not at the moment. I believe this project is important and helpful to educate anyone who is willing to learn about the history of killings by police officers, this interactive map works to show where and when these killings happened. It also shows the race and age of the people who have been murdered.



                                       
